Ranil Wickramasinge


Profile of His Excellency Ranil Wickremesinghe
8th Executive President of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and Leader of the United National Party
Ranil Wickremesinghe has been sworn in as the President of Sri Lanka on 21st July 2022. He has been the Prime Minister of Sri Lanka on six occasions. He was first appointed PM from 1993 – 1994 after the assassination of President Ranasinghe Premadasa. Subsequently, from 2001 to 2004, he was elected as the Prime Minister to lead the United National Front Government during the presidency of Chandrika Kumaratunge. In January 2015, he was appointed as the Prime Minister of the coalition government after the election of President Maithripala Sirisena. His appointment was sanctioned by the Sri Lankan people at the general election of August 2015. Once again, in December 2018, President Sirisena was compelled to reappoint him as PM after illegally dismissing him in October 2018. In November 2019, after the defeat of the UNP presidential candidate, he resigned from his position as Prime Minister. In May 2022, he accepted the invitation made by President Gothabhaya Rajapakse to be appointed the Prime Minister of an interim government to extend his expertise and experience in mitigating the economic and political meltdown in the country.
He is the Leader of the United National Party (UNP), Sri Lanka’s oldest political party, founded in 1946. He is one of Sri Lanka’s most senior and experienced legislators who has served the country as an MP in all Parliaments since 1977 (apart from a break of 10 months from August 2020 to June 2021).
Political Beginnings


Born in 1949 after Sri Lanka gained independence from the British, Ranil Wickremesinghe is truly a leader of the new independent era. A lawyer by profession, he was elected to Parliament in 1977 (aged 28), having worked in the Youth League of the UNP from his university days. As the youngest Minister in Sri Lanka at the time, he held the post of Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs under President Jayewardene. Very soon, in recognition of his exceptional talents and unique capacity for work, he was appointed to the Cabinet of Ministers as the Minister of Youth Affairs and Employment. Later on, he was given the portfolio of education. Then in 1989, as a seasoned legislator, he was made the Leader of the House under President Premadasa. He also served as the Minister of Industries, Science and Technology.
Early Achievements

From 1977 to 1994, during the seventeen years that the UNP was consecutively returned to power, Ranil Wickremesinghe, as a dynamic young politician, had a crucial impact on the country’s development. Many consider him the best education minister produced by the country due to the radical reforms he initiated in the 1980s aimed at the qualitative improvement of school education. The reforms involve upgrading subjects such as English and introducing Technology and Computer skills. He also professionalised the educational service via the Sri Lanka Education Administrative Service (SLEAS). He launched the National Institute of Education (NIS) and the colleges of education to provide training for Sri Lankan teachers. He also instituted the National Youth Services Centre at Maharagama and the national youth corps (NYC) – a youth development organisation. Apprenticeship training was reorganised, leading to the founding of the National Apprentice and Industrial Training Authority (NAITA) and vocational training centres. He energised the young people in Sri Lanka with creative, motivational, skill development programs through youth clubs (Yovun Samaja) and youth camps (Yovunpura).
Later, as the Minister of Industries, Science and Technology (1989 – 1994), he was responsible for Sri Lanka’s second round of economic liberalisation in 1989. It concentrated on financial de-regularisation and industrial promotion in rural areas through infrastructure development and the institution of industrial estates. Along with the Science and Technology Act, he introduced Sri Lanka to the IT age by initiating the Info-Sri Lanka exhibitions, and in 1993 signed the agreement with US Vice-President Al Gore to get the country connected to the Internet. His industrialisation strategy led to President Ranasinghe Premadasa’s 200 garment factories project. Among the other industries promoted was value addition in rubber gloves and automobile and industrial tires.
In 1977, Biyagama was one of the least developed constituencies in the island. As the MP for Biyagama, he dramatically developed his electorate to become a modern model suburb with carpeted roads, electricity, water, sanitation, schools, community centres and other infrastructure. Due to his economic development program, Biyagama is today one of the leading export-oriented regional economies. It has an investment promotion zone that includes the Biyagama Free Trade Zone (1985) on one side of the Kelani River and the Seethawaka Investment Promotion Zone (1993) on the other) and several manufacturing areas that employ thousands of young men and women in a range of industries.
Prime Minister Ranil


In 1993 after the untimely demise of President Premadasa, Ranil Wickremesinghe was unexpectedly appointed the Prime Minister during the brief presidency of D. B. Wijetunge. Ever ready for a challenge, the young Prime Minister rose to the responsibility of high office. He is credited for ensuring the country’s law, order and stability at this crucial juncture. During this short period, he drove the economy; the country recorded its highest economic growth of the decade. He introduced new technologies and strengthened the Army with a new program of training to fight the LTTE (Liberation Tigers of Tamil Elam).
Leader of the United National Party and Leader of the Opposition in Parliament


After the UNP was voted out in 1994, Ranil Wickremesinghe became the Leader of the United National Party. Under his leadership, the UNP has undertaken several rounds of extensive restructuring at institutional and grassroots levels from time to time. He has worked to democratise the party to ensure a more equitable balance in representation, especially when it comes to ethnicity, gender and youth.
Ranil Wickremesinghe was appointed the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, a position he held from 1994 to 2001 and 2004 to 2015.
Prime Minister Again and Again

representation at the local authority level in 2018. Actions taken for macroeconomic stability led tIn 2001, Ranil Wickremesinghe led his party back to power and was sworn in as Prime Minister from 2001 to 2004. Despite a president from an opposing party at the helm of the state and a rampant Opposition in Parliament, Ranil Wickremesinghe’s most significant achievements were to restore full-time electricity, rejuvenate the ailing economy from a growth rate of -1.55% to 3.96% in 2002, break down the many ethnic barriers in the country, bring the warring LTTE to the negotiating table for peace talks, and galvanise the goodwill and financial support of the international community for Sri Lanka. For the first time, in 2004, the country became self-sufficient in rice after many centuries.
After another stint in the Opposition, in January 2015, Ranil Wickremesinghe functioned as Prime Minister following President Sirisena’s election. A few months later, he won the general elections to continue as PM. This time too, he had to carry out governmental affairs under an increasingly hostile President from 2018 onwards. Despite the manipulations of President Sirisena, significant achievements during this era included a series of legislative and legal reforms to institute good governance. This involved pruning the extensive powers of the presidency and a return to parliamentary democracy via the 19th Amendment to the Constitution. Other legislation included the repeal of the criminal defamation provisions of the Penal Code, enacting the Right to Information Act, the National Audit Act, and the Active Liability Management Act. Parliamentary oversight committees were instituted to ensure due process in the execution of law and order
(thereby improving the human rights profile of the country). Legislation was enacted to enhance women’s participation in politics, leading to a minimum quota of 25% women’s o Sri Lanka’s primary budget indicating a surplus in 2015, for the first time after 62 years. It was repeated in 2019. Other achievements include upgrading the health and educational sectors (establishing an island-wide emergency medical service – Suvasariya), strengthening diplomatic relations, and enhancing Sri Lanka’s international image.
In August 2020, Ranil Wickremesinghe and the UNP were defeated, and the Party only retained a single bonus seat in Parliament. He had virtually retired when the Party nominated him back to Parliament on the national list. This was so that he could offer his expertise to ease the growing crisis in the country due to the Rajapakse regime’s mismanagement of the economy  
 




Jaffna University’s Clinical Training and Research Block
Last Friday (24 May 2024) saw my wife and me attending the Opening Ceremony of Jaffna University’s Clinical Training and Research Block behind the CEB facilities on Hospital Road. It was a welcome development. What was wrong, however, is that almost every speaker tried to root for the President’s re-election at the hustings in or around October.
A true democratic culture prevents state resources being used for electoral politics. The President wants the people’s assent for his presidency that has so far eluded him.  The UGC Chairman Sampath Amaratunge came all the way from Colombo during a long weekend to root for Ranil Wickremesinghe. Rather shockingly, after listing the Jaffna-friendly development activities and frequent visits to Jaffna by Ranil, he ended his speech saying “now Jaffna must help him.” What a let-down for the public service! Dean/Medicine Prof. R. Surenthirakumaran, upheld the dignity of his office (which he owes to faculty election unlike the President’s UGC appointments) by keeping away from politics. Practically all other speakers who need Ranil’s re-election to stay on in office, rooted for him.
Between them, they promised new teacher appointments – 375 appointments distributed the next day, the 25th. At that ceremony Ranil praised “Jaffna Teaching Tradition,” highlighted the importance of restoring this tradition and emphasized the need for teachers to serve as exemplary figures in society.
Amazing that such an educated and roundly read man as Ranil did not see the contradiction in having the highest official of the university system training graduates, misusing the office of UGC Chairman to shamelessly root for the President on the eve of elections and asking Jaffna to help him. Does the  politics-free “University Teaching Tradition” have no place? Is it not far more important than the tradition for school teachers?
Ads by FatChilli
At the launching of  SLPP presidential manifesto in October 2019 in my last year on the Election Commission, we decided that action was warranted against the Government Medical Officers Association (GMOA) President Anuruddha Padeniya for appearing on the stage at the relevant political rally. Nothing happened to him! There are others like Ali Sabry who threatened Muslims with thrashing if they did not vote for Gotabaya Rajapaksa. I pressed for action that never came about. When the Ven. Bataramulle Seelarathana Thero as presidential candidate promised from a temple in Vavuniya that he would halt the slaughter of cattle and I asked for punishment, nothing happened. But a butcher in Vaddukkoddai was shut down and another forced to close his shop that was deemed too close to the Nallur Temple by a people who relish mutton  and chicken and even MacDonald’s beef when overseas.
We have failed to uphold the traditions from 1971 when Gamini Dissanayake made promises to Hindus from a temple and was unseated by court for that.
At the teacher-appoinment ceremony, Governor PSM Charles, presented a commemorative gift to Ranil. If the gift had been charged to the government, that too would be a bad tradition in governance. As I recall, when I was on overseas trips from the Election Commission, gifts charged to the Commission would be taken, and we Commission Members would return with expensive gifts such as a leather brief-case embossed with the name of the Commission we visited. There were also gifts to and from other Commissions coming there.
In contrast, when I worked at the National University of Singapore (NUS) taking students on industrial visits, we would get expensive gifts like programmable calculators that we had to report to and give the department. These would be used as gifts for those winning competitions at departmental parties. Strangely, a lady from that same NUS gifted the President with some souvenir of unknown value at the opening ceremony. Apparently Jaffna and NUS have some shared student training programme. Be that as it may, does NUS practise a high standard only at home?
Ranil himself has been too close to corruption and murder for me to trust him.
Corrupt University Grants Commission: Siva Sivananthan and Illinois Senator Dick Durbin
Vasanthi Arasaratnam, appointed to the UGC by Ranil, was at the opening in style. It is publicly known that she has been accused by the Auditor General of swindling hundreds of millions of rupees  in a Faculty Networking Project while Dean/Medicine and continues to get appointed to prestigious positions. Corrupt governments need corrupt academics to help them do corrupt things.
There is a developing nexus between the UGC, and University of Chicago Illinois’ Siva Sivananthan and Illinois’ Senior Senator Richard “Dick” Durbin. Sivananthan from Hindu College has done well as a multi-millionaire academic (millionaires now being a dime a dozen). His company makes night vision glasses. The way American academia works, he donates to Durbin’s election campaigns and Durbin says nice things about him to help him win grants, even suggesting that he, the sixth of nine children, grew up without electricity and came as a simpleton to America thinking Americans ate dogs (because of hotdogs) and America helped him grow as a scientist.
With that close Sivananthan-Dubin nexus General Mark A. Milley, Chief of Staff, US Army, promised the Senate, among other things, the enhancement of Soldier Lethality through night vision goggles, the product of Sivananthan’s company. According to Matt Bissonnette, a Member of the SEAL Team 6 that raided Osama Bin Laden’s hideout, “The 2011 assault on Osama bin Laden’s compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan exposed two of the US military’s top-secret weapons programs, the MH-X Silent Hawk helicopter and $65,000 highly modified night-vision goggles that were issued to each elite soldier on the raid.”
As the White House put it, Sivananthan’s work is at the heart of night vision technology that helped the US Army “to reach Bin Laden’s hideout.” Perhaps fearing danger, Sivananthan seems a little wary, saying “If a surgical knife is used for a murder, how can we charge the manufacturer for supporting the murder? “
As recently as last year Sivananthan was awarded a grant of over US$ 149 million by the US government through a negotiated proposal – I take it to mean without competition.
With this background Sivananthan has overtures to the UGC. Persons from the UGC , Jaffna and Peradeniya were invited in March this year and lavishly feted at UIC and my son’s elite University of Illinois Urbana Champaign. With all the restrictions of funds they were entertained in the best hotels. Those who could not get US visas got them through Sivananthan’s intervention. Whatever is going on, given the corrupt credentials of people like Arasaratnan, I pray it is above board and promoting rather than corrupting of excellence. I fear that rarely are things free.
Ranil Wickremesinghe’s Speech at the Medical Faculty
The President who speaks impeccable English was not at his characteristic best perhaps because of anxiety over the upcoming election and having to rely so much on the Tamil vote. Besides Douglas Devenanda, only two Jaffna District MPs turned up, M.A. Sumanthiran and Dharmalingam Siddharthan, the latter too joining in extravagantly praising the Presiddnt while the former exercised dignified circumspection. As one speaker argued at the medical faculty, we owe it to help him after we scuttled his election as President in 2005. The boycott ordered by Prabhakaran was left to be inferred.
Ranil the Royalist began with “Honorable the Dean,” “Honorable the Governor” etc..
His uncle, The Rt. Rev. Lakshman Wickremesinghe, cried in Jaffna at the Maruthanamadam Ashram in the immediate aftermath of the 1983 riots lamenting that a close family member of his was partly responsible for the riots.
While previous speakers boasted of the little trinkets Ranil was throwing at us, Ranil himself spoke of big projects he would soon shower on us. However, these were all promises with no concrete date. Karapitiya has been declared a National Teaching Hospital and Jaffna will be the next. Huge power projects, both solar and wind are coming. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission will come after determining its judicial powers. These are all mere promises and we will be waiting like the proverbial parrot for the fruit to ripen but never will.
The biggest promise was the water project. We are waiting and waiting.
The Jaffna Water Project: Where is the US$830 Million?
The Reverse Osmosis water project exists most likely for the commissions. It has been on for some years now. From ADB money, it has been financed to the tune of US$830 million. At one time we were told that this is expensive but the government would sell us the water at the same price it sells it for in the South. Would Parliament and the Sinhalese agree? The money is gone. But where is the water?
Then came the project about water from Kilinochchi. Pipes were laid, rather aggressively. The Jaffna Water Board Engineer promised my neighbors, the single daughters of our baker Simon Ranasinghe, that they need to take a short route through their compound. This meant going under their driveway. The daughters, one unmarried and the other widowed, were reluctant. I was asked to promise them that their driveway would be rebuilt exacly in the same way. I intervened. They agreed. And after the Water Board wreaked their havoc, they never came back to redo the driveway. This was Tamil engineers cheating two half Sinhalese women.
When the Kilinochchi water project was touted Kilinonchhi MP Sivagnanam Shritharan opposed it because it would draw on Iranaimadu waters from Kilinochchi. The pipes were laid without the requisite Social Impact Assessment. In the Kilinochchi people’s reckoning, the rains fail once in 4 years or so and when that happens, the Kilinochchi farmers will be short of water unless the waterlines to Jaffna are turned off. The latter is an unlikely prospect  if not an outright impossibility because the more powerful Jaffna people would not allow it, not least because they would have neglected their normal sources of water such as their household wells. However much we in Jaffna shout saying the Kilinochchi people have to drop their opposition for the common good, we know that it is an unfair demand.
Over the years since one Engineer Arumugam proposed the Paalaaru project in 1954, the irrigation department, the Mahaweli Authority, various local and foreign consultants, and international agencies have contributed to and improved the proposal by late 2023. After his visit Ranil’s commissioned a pilot project to bring water from Paalaaru in Mannar of limited capacity compared to Iranaimadu. What if the pilot project proves itself to not meet our needs? If Paalaaru proves satisfactory, the Reverse Osmosis project will be shut down and we are informed that it will be used briefly and as a standby after 2032.
Did no one foresee this wastage? Is a standby supply the only thing we will get for US$ 860 million? Indeed, where is the US$ 830 million? Who will pay for this wastage?
Is this the Ranil we are asked to trust and in whose hands the IMF has entrusted US$ 3 billion and is planning to give more?
The Baltimore Bridge Ship
On 26 March 2024 or so, a container ship Dali crashed into the Baltimore Bridge. Based on a Morning Leader report, the ship was transporting 764 tonnes of hazardous materials to Sri Lanka, mainly consisting of corrosives, flammables, and miscellaneous hazardous materials including explosives and lithium-ion batteries. The contents of its 644 other containers are yet to be ascertained.
What is concerning is that no one has asked who was importing this hazardous material and what use it was intended for.
SLPA Additional Managing Director (Operations) D.L.R. Weerasinghe stated that the SLPA had no mandate to conduct any investigation because the cargo belonged to the ship. However, he clarified that action could be taken only if there had been a violation of Sri Lankan regulations.
Weerasinghe’s is Sri Lanka’s classic padalling of impunity. Election laws say that uttering political statements from a religious institution is punishable. When the Standing Committee Report under Anglican Bishop Dhilo Canagasabey had explicit political references at the Bauddhaloka Mawatte Cathedral and I asked for the implementation of the law, the Commission ruled that the Bishop’s pro-UNP sentiments during elections were written from church but not uttered! Bishop Canagasabey should really have been jailed.
The police are arresting Tamils suspecting them of reorganizing the LTTE but will not even inquire in anticipation of some crime to be committed in the disposal of the hazardous material. I have asked an MP to raise a question in parliament but our democracy is failing us.
A Nation without Accountability but with Total Impunity
Somebody made good money from that US$830 million. Who? How much after deducting the cost of plants we plan not to use? One of Ranil’s crooked Ministers must have it in his pocket. As Jehan Perera points out, Ranil is violating even the orders of the Supreme Court:
A year ago, the government ignored the Election Commission’s declaration of local government elections when they fell due. The government claimed that the economic crisis in the country did not make it possible for the government to release the money needed to conduct the elections. This controversy was taken to the Supreme Court which ruled that the funds already set aside in the government budget for elections should not be blocked and should be used for the purposes they were meant for. But the government did not hold those elections and continues to have them postponed in violation of the law.
How can we vote for Ranil when he will not obey even the Supreme Court? We are told there is no money but he has found the money to have himself elected Preidient. Right now, there is a matter concerning importing 1,728 BMW vehicles under concessionary duty permits, which are generally issued to public officials when in reality those vehicles were not imported by the permit holders. Earlier, it was alleged that the Sri Lanka Customs had ignored or suppressed the matter, which is said to involve around Rs. 16 billion duty fraud, causing a massive loss to the state coffers. […] The Court of Appeal has issued a directive to the Customs DG to take action in accordance with the Customs Ordinance. It is alleged that despite the directive, the DG is yet to send even a notice to the relevant Respondents.
The alleged fraud is by Prestige Automobile (Pte) Ltd., the Petitioner who did not want another inquiry using new evidence. The crux of the matter is that in the words of the Court of Appeal, a comparison of the invoices issued by BMW AG Germany with the value of the vehicle as found on German Customs Export database indicates that the accurate value of the vehicle has not been set out in the invoices claimed as sent to the Petitioner by BMW AG Germany … Such a complicated arrangement in respect of invoices issued by BMW AG Germany to the Petitioner is to ensure that the commission payable to the Petitioner is not reflected in the value of the vehicle; i.e., if the true value of the vehicle is reflected the vehicle would exceed the permit threshold and be liable to customs duty.
So, Prestige Automobile did not produce the invoice from BMW in Germany which it had but refused, and the customs inquiry was concluded without its aid. Now that it has been obtained from Germany the question facing the Court of Appeal is whether, after concluding an inquiry, it may be reopened with fresh evidence. Yes, the Court of Appeal answered considering that new evidence has come to light that Customs did not have, and could not have come upon exercising its best due diligence.
Nagananda Kodituwakku, Counsel for one of the Intervenient Petitioners informs me that almost every PC is defending this fraud in court and that there is no way in which the lawyers for Prestige Automobile and its Directors  could not know that they were defending fraud given that they had access to the invoices that Prestige Automobile refused to release and its discrepancy with what was submitted. Nagananda faults me for being friends with M.A. Sumanthiran and being the uncle of Niran Anketell who defended some 4 persons by the name of Reuter who are Directors at Prestige Automobile. To me, as one who teaches ethics to professionals, a lawyer may defend anyone but also has the freedom to refuse to take on obnoxious thieves as clients as seems to have happened here.
In a petition where I joined Nagananda in challenging the appointment of Dhammika Perera as national list MP, we were offered Rs. 10 million by a TV network for any legal NGO we set up if we withdrew the case. Imagine the money that is up for grabs.  Imagine what lawyers get!
Asking the Right Questions
Our failure in Sri Lanka is that we never ask questions when fraud and corruption stare us in the face. How do our MPs raise their huge campaign finance? Where do they get the money by which they buy MPs to cross-over? To buy parties? For whom was the lethal cargo aboard the ship Dali and what were they going to do with it? Why is there no investigation?
Without satisfactory answers no one should vote for Wickremesinghe; not without studying the Batalanda Commission Report of 1 March 1999 stating that in May 1997 Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) Keerthi Kumara Atapattu had testified  that Wickramasinghe had an office in the Batalanda Housing Scheme, while Peiris had a home there (Daily News 8 May 1997; ibid. 3 June 1997). […] The Batalanda Commission report that was submitted to President Chandrika on 27 March 1997 found the police Counter Subversive Unit (CSU) headed by Peiris “directly responsible” for the torture carried out at the illegal unofficial detention centre at Batalanda Housing Scheme (Sri Lanka Monitor Apr. 1998). The report also found Wickremesinghe knew of the centre’s existence (ibid.).”
Here is what LankaNews Web said on 2 Oct. 2016:
“It is believed that nearly 5,000–10,000 JVP activists were brutally tortured and killed in the Batalanda camp alone. Current president and UNP leader Ranil Wickremesinghe has been accused of being the main political authority behind the alleged detention centre. The Batalanda Commission was appointed by the government of Chandrika Kumaratunga to look into the violations of human rights and crimes committed in the Batalanda torture and detention centre. In its report, the commission recommended the government to take legal action against then-opposition leader Ranil Wickremesinghe and to strip him of his civic rights, which would have made him ineligible to run for elections. “
People are ready to vote for the UNP pointing to JVP atrocitoes in 1971nand 1989. Why do we not ask of the  UNP’s SLFP atrocities then and during the war? Of the Rajapksa’ atorcities at the end of the war and the coverup by the UNP and the SLFP and the SLPP since?
People say only Ranil can usher in development without asking how there was no money when Gotabaya ran away and how there was money rather suddenly after Ranil became President?
We Tamils who came through murder, disappearances, rape and executions should not risk going under a leader who can take us back there and who makes claims to a stage-managed recovery of the economy.
The Ranil-UNP Character
Some 80 MPs had their property damaged during Aragalya and this damage has been estimated at Rs. 1,414 billion. Thirtyone  MPs have been paid Rs. 714 million up to this month.
This generosity almost entirely to Sinhalese is by Ranil. I ask however, how many Tamils whose lives were destroyed by the UNP during the 1983 riots have been compensated.
As a writer, for me the most totalitarian and undemocratic of Ranils actions is the ICCPR Act which is being used to restrict religious thinking. The Hindu and the Times of India report that Modi wants Manu’s Laws to be enforced in India.
As Lord Manu says, “IX. 3:  Her father protects her in childhood, her husband protects her in youth and her sons protect her in old age; a woman is never fit for independence.”
I cannot write that this is sexist and stupid without being sure that I will not be prosecuted by Ranil’s government. Already Church Missionary Society officials have sent Sinhalese lawyers to Jaffna and threatened prosecution of a former teacher at St. John’s College at a time when it was still not passed, and forced him to withdraw in writing his criticism of corruption in the Church. Ranil must go!
We should vote for the least bad of the candidates. Is the unknown Devil sometimes less risky than the Devil whom we know lies to us and has screwed us up for so long? No thinking Sri Lankan should vote for Ranil.


I can turn around Sri Lanka’s economy: PM Ranil Wickremesinghe
https://youtu.be/S1yYLNU-BEo


Sri Lanka Election 2024:
Key Political Candidates and Campaigns
Rajni Gamage, Kanika Kaur
11 September 2024
Previous
Summary
 
In the 2024 presidential election in Sri Lanka, the three leading candidates are current president, Ranil Wickremesinghe, Sajith Premadasa and Anura Kumara Dissanayake. This is the first election since the 2022 economic crisis and ensuing mass street protests. In the lead-up to the 21 September 2024 election, the key candidates have launched their presidential manifestos which articulate their positions on key economic and political issues.
 
 
Introduction
 
The 2024 Sri Lankan election is set to be a pivotal moment in the nation’s political and economic history. This election is significant because it is the first electoral process in over four years and follows the widespread protests that shook the nation in 2022. These protests, known as Aragalaya (Struggle), were driven by widespread dissatisfaction with economic mismanagement under the Gotabaya Rajapaksa government. It culminated in the resignation of the president, prime minister and cabinet, creating a sense of urgency for political change.[1]
 
In July 2022, Ranil Wickremesinghe was elected president through a parliamentary vote. Under his leadership, the government secured approximately US$2.9 billion ($S3.79 billion) bailout from the International Monetary Fund (IMF).[2] Some indicators of this government’s economic stabilisation drive and the IMF-led reforms programme are a reduced rate of inflation and increased foreign reserves to approximately US$5.4 billion (S$7 billion) by May 2024. However, since 2022, poverty and inequality have increased exponentially.[3]
 
The election will serve partly as a referendum on the current government’s handling of the economic crisis and its recovery efforts. The election campaigns are also in response to the strained social contract and deficit in political legitimacy that contributed to the Aragalaya.
 
Key Contenders
 
The three major candidates – Wickremesinghe, who is running on an independent platform, Sajith Premadasa from the Samagi Jana Balawegaya (SJB), and Anura Kumara Dissanayake from the National People’s Power (NPP) – have launched their campaign manifestos.
 
Ranil Wickremesinghe
 
Wickremesinghe is running for presidency on an independent platform. Despite leading the United National Party (UNP), the president’s decision to run on an independent platform was likely driven by the need to accommodate support from various political groups. It is claimed that around 90 Sri Lanka Podujana Peramuna (SLPP) members of parliament (MPs) have declared their support for the president.[4] The president’s break with the Rajapaksas has enabled him to broaden his political base and accommodate those who did not wish to support him while he was allied with the Rajapaksas.
 
Wickremesinghe’s economic policy has been closely aligned with the IMF-led recovery programme. His campaign narrative is of economic stability, claiming that he (and his team of MPs) was the only one who stepped up to the task during the 2022 crisis when allegedly no one else was willing to take on such an enormous risk. The government is championing that it achieved certain macroeconomic indicators such as easing inflation and built foreign reserves up to US$5.4 billion (S$7 billion) by May 2024. The president’s campaign manifesto, Puluwan Sri Lanka (‘Sri Lanka Can’), includes the vision of a Theravada Trade Economy which claims to be an economic system based on the concept of Theravada Buddhist (which is likely to appeal to the Sinhala Buddhist majority vote) but essentially advocates for highly competitive and export-oriented trade over economic policies that are primarily focused on domestic production.[5]
 
On the national question, Wickremesinghe has committed to fully implementing the 13th Amendment to the Constitution (including land and police powers), which mandates power-sharing with the Tamil minority through the provincial council system.[6] On the reconciliation front, some efforts have been made under the Wickremesinghe government since 2022, such as establishing a Truth, Unity and Reconciliation Commission and passing the Office for National Unity and Reconciliation Bill. However, despite promising a resolution to the national question since assuming office, substantial progress on this front has been made second to the task of economic recovery.
 
The president has also faced critiques for undemocratic actions, including a failed attempt to extend the Attorney General’s tenure beyond what was legally mandated, clashes with the judiciary over a gender equality bill and the suggestion of appointing a parliamentary committee to override the Supreme Court’s decisions. This, alongside the non-appointment of an Inspector General of Police (IGP) after the existing IGP was suspended due to a Supreme Court ruling, has raised concerns about potential executive overreach.[7] As part of his government’s reforms programme, laws passed such as the Online Safety Act and the Anti-terrorism Act have also been criticised by Human Rights Watch as detrimental to democratic freedoms and rights.
 
Despite Wickremesinghe’s campaign rhetoric of having stabilised the economy, the growing poverty and inequality in the country have made him increasingly unpopular. Election polls conducted by the Institute of Health Policy indicate that Dissanayake and Premadasa are leading, with the current president in third place.[8] Since 2022, poverty has doubled to 25 per cent of the population, with increasing issues such as inequality, food insecurity and debt vulnerability. A United Nations report found Sri Lanka to be one of the top five countries in the Asia-Pacific region in terms of wealth inequality.[9] In response to increasing poverty and inequity, Wickremesinghe launched a poverty alleviation programme called Aswesuma and the Urumaya programme, the latter of which involves distributing freehold land titles to two million households. In addition to these, there have been several state subsidies and freebies in the lead-up to the election, along with announcements of salary hikes, fertiliser subsidies and ongoing efforts to reduce Pay As You Earn tax rates.
 
Sajith Premadasa
 
The second key presidential aspirant, Premadasa, is the leader of the SJB. It was formed in 2020 as a breakaway of the UNP. Premadasa lost the 2019 presidential election, coming second after securing 41.99 per cent of the vote. The SJB is a broad-tent party, and its current alliance, the Samagi Jana Sandhanaya, includes members from a wide range of political camps and parties, including the Sri Lanka Muslim Congress, the People’s Freedom Congress (a SLPP-breakaway), the Tamil Progressive Alliance and a faction of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP).
 
Being a breakaway of the UNP, the SJB advocates largely for economic liberalism. However, the SJB under Premadasa attempts to position itself to be slightly left of the current government’s economic policy. Premadasa’s manifesto (‘A Win for All’) characterises its economic policy as “social democratic”. Premadasa has worked to cultivate a pro-poor image, leveraging his father’s (former President Ranasinghe Premadasa) legacy to appeal to the economically marginalised and with campaign promises of state-linked patronage and subsidies.[10] For example, his manifesto outlines plans to provide government-owned land for the construction of low-income and middle-class housing schemes, aiming to address housing challenges faced by these groups.[11] It also promises to negotiate within the existing IMF deal for terms that are more favourable for the more economically vulnerable sections of society.[12]
 
The Premadasa campaign presents itself as a competent team with governance experience yet distinct (at least in degree) from the corruption associated with the SLPP. The manifesto has promised strong anti-corruption measures and has committed to changing the present constitution through consultations with religious dignitaries, political parties and civil society members, aiming to transition to a parliamentary system with maximum devolution based on the 13th Amendment.[13]
 
Anura Kumara Dissanayake
 
The third frontrunner presidential candidate is Dissanayake, who heads the NPP which is a political alliance in which the Communist-Leninist Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) is the main political party. The NPP has had a sharp rise in popularity since 2022, having secured only around three per cent of the vote in the last presidential election. Its anti-corruption message and promise of a change in political culture resonate strongly with voters who are demanding ‘system change’ – a key slogan during the Aragalaya.
 
Historically, the NPP has opposed IMF programmes, but its recent endorsement of the current programme (although with a renegotiation of its terms) as seen in its manifesto, ‘A Rich Country, A Beautiful Life’, marks a significant shift.[14] The NPP’s leadership has made pragmatic concessions, seen during a more recent visit to India, where it expressed alignment with foreign investment interests despite earlier opposition. Its current platform advocates a state-directed mixed economy, and this is evident in its stance on privatisation of only some state-owned enterprises.[15] The party’s economic growth policy prioritises industrialisation and domestic manufacturing.
 
The NPP’s election campaign has a left populist tone, including promises of cutting taxes and increasing government employee salaries. On the national question, the NPP’s stance has undergone notable evolution. While it has not fully endorsed the 13th Amendment, it has committed to maintaining the provincial council system.[16] This nuanced position reflects a significant shift in the party’s approach, driven by its growing popularity and the need to appeal to a broader electorate, particularly as it remains uninterested in forming alliances ahead of the election.
 
Despite this shift, the NPP’s discourse on reconciliation and power-sharing remains less forthcoming compared to the other two candidates. There is a possibility for latent Sinhala Buddhist nationalist tendencies to later surface as electoral pressures mount, especially given the nationalist lobbying the JVP has led since the late 1980s, and in supporting Mahinda Rajapaksa coming into power in 2005 and that government’s war effort. The NPP has remained silent on the issue of downsizing the military and has instead mobilised ex-military collectives across the country and stated that it would not seek to persecute alleged human rights violations and war crimes during the ethnic conflict.[17]
 
Namal Rajapaksa
 
In August 2024, Namal Rajapaksa was announced as the SLPP presidential candidate. The SLPP, led by the Rajapaksa family, faces a crisis of legitimacy following the economic downturn and widespread public disillusionment as manifested in the Aragalaya. This disillusioned voter base is numerically significant because it gave the SLPP the largest-ever majority in the parliament in 2020. At present, the SLPP is fractured, with most of its MPs supporting Wickremesinghe’s campaign.[18]
 
In a bid to distance the SLPP from the current Wickremesinghe administration, Namal has opposed policies such as privatisation, taxation policy, the full implementation of the 13th Amendment and economic integration with India. While Namal is expected to gain a smaller section of the vote compared to the main three candidates, the SLPP is likely to retain some of its voter base. Among the reasons for this is the absence of any real contender for the left nationalist space that the Rajapaksa ideology had occupied since 2005 with the NPP increasingly becoming a catch-all party. Moreover, the current SLPP campaign is widely seen as platforming Namal to prepare him as a more serious political contender in the next presidential election.
 
Smaller Parties and Coalition Potential
 
In countries that have defaulted on debt payments, elections often fail to produce clear winners, necessitating post-election coalitions. Sri Lanka is no exception, with most candidates actively seeking alliances to maximise their electoral chances.[19] Sri Lanka’s presidential electoral system is one where if a candidate is unable to secure a simple majority in the first round of voting, second and third preferences (of voters whose first preference is eliminated) are used to determine the winner out of the top two candidates. The 2024 election has three strong candidates and could be the first time when the second round is activated. As a result, forming alliances with smaller parties, especially minority parties are even more significant than before for the main candidates, as the latter forms around 25 per cent of the electorate. The NPP, which has in the past (as the JVP) formed alliances (formal or informal) with political parties across the ideological spectrum, has declared it will not form any pre-election alliances with any other mainstream establishment party.
 
Tamil political parties have been pivotal in past presidential elections. The Ilankai Tamil Arasu Kachchi (ITAK), the main political party within the Tamil National Alliance, pledged its support for Premadasa.[20] Meanwhile, a Tamil common candidate, former ITAK MP, P Ariyanethran, has been nominated. However, this is not expected to significantly split the Tamil vote as it is backed by a group of smaller Tamil parties. Much of the Northern Tamil vote is expected to be split between supporting Wickremesinghe and Premadasa. Similarly, with the hill-country Tamil constituency, the political representatives (Ceylon Workers’ Congress and Tamil People’s Alliance) are split between Wickremesinghe and Premadasa. Meanwhile, the Muslim Congress and All Ceylon Muslim Congress have backed Premadasa, although there should be some support for Wickremesinghe, due to traditional patronage and voting preferences. The NPP, in contrast, is unlikely to have a significant amount of support from the minority communities, due to historically not having nurtured deep relationships with these communities.
 
Meanwhile, the SLFP, which has been caught in internal power struggles, has splintered into three groups. The Dayasiri Jayasekara faction backs the SJB, a second faction backs the Wickremesinghe camp and a third faction comprising former president Maithripala Sirisena, is not backing any candidate. The SLFP is a smaller party (with 13 MPs in parliament) but retains the ability to mobilise some votes for its preferred candidate due to its traditional grassroots mechanisms.
 
Besides these parties, new smaller parties such as the Sarvajana Balaya and People’s Struggle Alliance are unlikely to win many votes but have the potential to significantly influence the ideological discourse post-election, as they provide alternatives to the increasing consensus of the three main candidates. Dilith Jayaweera, the presidential candidate from the Sarvajana Balaya, adopts an economic nationalist and anti-power sharing stance.[21] In contrast, Nuwan Bopage, the presidential candidate of the People’s Struggle Alliance, advocates left-leaning economic policies such as an economic alternative to the IMF programme and a renegotiation of debt restructuring, alongside supporting substantial power sharing, that goes beyond the current constitutional provisions. The Alliance comprises the Frontline Socialist Party , other left parties and Aragalya activists.
 
Conclusion
 
The Sri Lankan election is occurring at a critical juncture in the nation’s political and economic history, marking the first electoral process since the widespread protests in 2022. The major candidates include Wickremesinghe, running on an independent platform with a focus on IMF-led economic recovery, Premadasa, who emphasises social democratic policies and pro-poor initiatives and Dissanayake of the NPP, who advocates for systemic change and anti-corruption measures. The election is expected to be highly competitive, with the possibility of a second-round vote if no candidate secures a simple majority. If the second-round vote is activated, the possibility of post-election instability in the interim, and low legitimacy of the incoming president is likely. Post-election coalitions may be necessary, reflecting the fragmented political environment and the ongoing search for stable governance amidst economic recovery efforts.
 
The outcome of the election could also significantly influence the nation’s geopolitical dynamics, particularly its relationships with regional powers such as India, key Western powers and China. While all three main contenders appear to be inclined towards a balanced foreign policy, in practice, all governments in the past and present have (perceived or real) tilted slightly towards one geopolitical camp. While a Wickremesinghe or Premadasa government is expected to lean more towards India and the Western powers, a NPP government is expected to build closer ties with China. Additionally, the influence of the smaller parties, especially those opposing deep economic ties with India or advocating for alternative economic strategies, could further complicate Sri Lanka’s foreign policy direction, impacting its positioning within the broader South Asian region and beyond.